Brand new arays doc. A small amount of work remains to be done. (#4307)
yugabyte/yugabyte-db: docs/content/latest/api/ysql/datatypes/type_array/functions-operators/properties.md

---
title: Array properties
linkTitle: Array properties
headerTitle: Functions for reporting the geometric properties of an array
description: Functions for reporting the geometric properties of an array
menu:
  latest:
    identifier: array-properties
    parent: array-functions-operators
isTocNested: false
showAsideToc: false
---

These functions return the various dimensional properties that jointly characterize an array. These three together completely specify the shape and size:

> - its dimensionality (`int`) ;
> - the lower bound along each dimension (`int`);
> - the upper bound along each dimension (`int`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- its dimensionality (`int`).
- the lower bound along each dimension (`int`).
- the upper bound along each dimension (`int`).
```

Author: When you have a list of bullets, each of which is a phrase (and not a sentence), what rule tells you to start each point with lower case letter and finish it with a period? I see this use of bullets as nothing other than a visual device that makes the old-fashioned way easier to read—namely a colon followed by phrases ending each with a semicolon (until the last ends with a period). I'm accepting this for now. But I hate it.

There are functions for returning two other properties: the length along each dimension (`int`); and its cardinality (`int`). But each of these can be derived from set set of the lower and upper bounds for all the dimensions. There is also a function that returns the values for the lower and upper bounds for all the dimensions as a single `text` value.

## Overview

The behavior of each of the functions for reporting the geometric properties of an array is illustrated by supplying the same two arrays as the first actual argument to two invocations of the function. The return value, in all cases, is insensitive to the array's data type and the values within the array.

Create and populate `table t` thus:

```postgresql
create table t(k int primary key, arr_1 text[], arr_2 text[]);
insert into t(k, arr_1, arr_2) values(1,
      '[3:10]={ 1, 2, 3, 4,   5, 6, 7, 8}',
  '[2:3][4:7]={{1, 2, 3, 4}, {5, 6, 7, 8}}'
  );
```

> We'll use it in the example for each of the functions. (The optional syntax items `[3:10]` and `[2:3][2:5]` specify the lower and upper bounds along the one dimension of the first array and along both dimensions of the second array. This syntax is explained [here](../../literals/array-of-primitive-values/#multidimensional-array-of-numeric-values).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will use it in the example for each of the functions. (The optional syntax items `[3:10]` and `[2:3][2:5]` specify the lower and upper bounds along the one dimension of the first array and along both dimensions of the second array. This syntax is explained in [Multidimensional array of numeric values](../../literals/array-of-primitive-values/#multidimensional-array-of-numeric-values).
```

> Run the `select` statement for each function to illustrate what produces for the same pair of input arrays

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run the `SELECT` statement for each function to illustrate what produces for the same pair of input arrays.
```

### array_ndims()

> **Purpose:** Returns the number of dimensions (i.e. its _dimensionality_) of the specified array.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Purpose:** Returns the number of dimensions (that is, the _dimensionality_) of the specified array.
```

Create the procedure `assert_semantics_and_traverse_values()` and then invoke it for each of the three provided data sets. You supply it with a one-dimensional array and a two dimensional array and, for each, your humanly determined estimates of these values:

- what `array_ndims()` returns,
- what `array_lower()` returns for each dimension,
- what `array_upper()` returns for each dimension.

The procedure obtains the actual values, programmatically, for all of the values that you supply and asserts that they agree.

Notice that the cardinality and the length along each dimension are omitted, by design, from this list. The procedure also obtains these values, programmatically, and checks that these agree with the values that are computed from, respectively, the length along each dimension and the upper and lower bounds along each dimension.

Notice, too, that the value that `array_dims()` returns can be computed from the upper and lower bounds along each dimension. So the procedure does this too and checks that the value returned by `array_dims()` is consistent with the values returned by `array_lower()` and `array_upper()`.

The procedure has some particular requirements:

> - the cardinality of each of the two supplied arrays must be the same;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- the cardinality of each of the two supplied arrays must be the same.
```

Author: Now suddenly you want a comma. earlier you wanted a period. Are you a semicolon hater?

Author: Nobody will even notice except we too, So I'm accepting it—inconsistency ntwithstandinh.

- the actual array values, in row-major order, must be the same, pairwise.

> These requirements might seem to be arbitrary. They are implemented so that the procedure can deliver two bonus benefits. It demonstrates how to traverse array values in row-major order using the values returned by the functions that this section describes. In this way, it shows you what the term "row-major order" means. And it compares the values, pairwise, for equality. This comparison rule is the basis of the semantics of the comparison operations described [here](../comparison).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These requirements might seem to be arbitrary. They are implemented so that the procedure can deliver two bonus benefits. It demonstrates how to traverse array values in row-major order using the values returned by the functions that this section describes. In this way, it shows you what the term "row-major order" means. And it compares the values, pairwise, for equality. This comparison rule is the basis of the semantics of the comparison operations described in [Comparison](../comparison).
```

> **Note:** there are no built-in functions for computing, for example, the product of two matrixes or the product of a vector and a matrix. (A vector is a one-dimensional array, and a matrix is a two-dimensional array.) But, as long as you know how to traverse the values in a matrix in row-major order, it's easy to implement the missing vector and matrix multiplication functionality for yourself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note:** There are no built-in functions for computing, for example, the product of two matrixes or the product of a vector and a matrix. (A vector is a one-dimensional array, and a matrix is a two-dimensional array.) But, as long as you know how to traverse the values in a matrix in row-major order, it's easy to implement the missing vector and matrix multiplication functionality for yourself.
```
